# Global Collections

Collections are Ruby arrays and Rake FileLists (that act like 
arrays). Ceedling did work to populate and assemble these by
processing the project file, using internal knowledge, 
expanding path globs, etc. at startup.

Collections are globally available Ruby constants. These 
constants are documented below. Collections are also available
via accessors on the `Configurator` object (same names but all
lower case methods).

Global collections are typically used in Rakefiles, plugins, 
and Ruby scripts where the contents tend to be especially 
handy for crafting custom functionality.

!!! note "Collections are no longer a core component of Ceedling"
    As Ceedling has grown in sophistication and as many of its 
    features now operate per test executable, the utility of and
    number of collections has dwindled.
    
    Once upon a time, nearly all Ceedling actions happened in 
    bulk and with the same collections used for all tasks. This 
    is no longer true.

* `COLLECTION_PROJECT_OPTIONS`:

    All project option files with path found in the configured 
    options paths having the configured YAML file extension.

* `COLLECTION_ALL_TESTS`:

    All files with path found in the configured test paths 
    having the configured source file extension. 

* `COLLECTION_ALL_ASSEMBLY`:

    All files with path found in the configured source and 
    test support paths having the configured assembly file 
    extension. 

* `COLLECTION_ALL_SOURCE`:

    All files with path found in the configured source paths 
    having the configured source file extension. 

* `COLLECTION_ALL_HEADERS`:

    All files with path found in the configured include, 
    support, and test paths having the configured header file 
    extension. 

* `COLLECTION_ALL_SUPPORT`:

    All files with path found in the configured test support 
    paths having the configured source file extension. 

* `COLLECTION_PATHS_INCLUDE`:

    All configured include paths.

* `COLLECTION_PATHS_SOURCE`:

    All configured source paths.

* `COLLECTION_PATHS_SUPPORT`:

    All configured support paths.

* `COLLECTION_PATHS_TEST`:

    All configured test paths.

* `COLLECTION_PATHS_SOURCE_AND_INCLUDE`:

    All configured source and include paths.

* `COLLECTION_PATHS_SOURCE_INCLUDE_VENDOR`:

    All configured source and include paths plus applicable 
    vendor paths (Unity’s source path plus CMock and 
    CException’s source paths if mocks and exceptions are 
    enabled).

* `COLLECTION_PATHS_TEST_SUPPORT_SOURCE_INCLUDE`:

    All configured test, support, source, and include paths.

* `COLLECTION_PATHS_TEST_SUPPORT_SOURCE_INCLUDE_VENDOR`:

    All test, support, source, include, and applicable 
    vendor paths (Unity’s source path plus CMock and 
    CException’s source paths if mocks and exceptions are 
    enabled).

* `COLLECTION_PATHS_RELEASE_TOOLCHAIN_INCLUDE`:

    All configured release toolchain include paths.

* `COLLECTION_PATHS_TEST_TOOLCHAIN_INCLUDE`:

    All configured test toolchain include paths.

* `COLLECTION_PATHS_VENDOR`:

    Unity’s source path plus CMock and CException’s source 
    paths if mocks and exceptions are enabled.

* `COLLECTION_VENDOR_FRAMEWORK_SOURCES`:

    Unity plus CMock, and CException’s .c filenames (without 
    paths) if mocks and exceptions are enabled.

* `COLLECTION_RELEASE_BUILD_INPUT`:

    * All files with path found in the configured source 
      paths having the configured source file extension.
    * If exceptions are enabled, the source files for 
      CException.
    * If assembly support is enabled, all assembly files 
      found in the configured paths having the configured 
      assembly file extension.

* `COLLECTION_EXISTING_TEST_BUILD_INPUT`:

    * All files with path found in the configured source 
      paths having the configured source file extension.
    * All files with path found in the configured test 
      paths having the configured source file extension.
    * Unity’s source files.
    * If exceptions are enabled, the source files for 
      CException.
    * If mocks are enabled, the C source files for CMock.
    * If assembly support is enabled, all assembly files 
      found in the configured paths having the configured 
      assembly file extension.

    This collection does not include .c files generated by 
    Ceedling and its supporting frameworks at build time 
    (e.g. test runners and mocks). Further, this collection 
    does not include source files added to a test 
    executable’s build list with the `TEST_SOURCE_FILE()` 
    build directive macro.

* `COLLECTION_RELEASE_ARTIFACT_EXTRA_LINK_OBJECTS`:

    If exceptions are enabled, CException’s .c filenames 
    (without paths) remapped to configured object file 
    extension.

* `COLLECTION_TEST_FIXTURE_EXTRA_LINK_OBJECTS`:

    All test support source filenames (without paths) 
    remapped to configured object file extension.

<br/>
