# 🌱 Ceedling Changelog

This format is based on [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.1.0/), and this project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

This changelog is complemented by two other documents:

1. 🔊 **[Release Notes](ReleaseNotes.md)** for announcements, education, acknowledgements, and known issues.
1. 💔 **[Breaking Changes](BreakingChanges.md)** for a list of impacts to existing Ceedling projects.

---

# [1.1.0] — Prerelease

## 🌟 Added

### Partials

[A Partial](https://throwtheswitch.github.io/Ceedling/1.1.0/testing-guide/partials/) is a new feature that allows a test author to work with portions of the same C module under test differently from within the same test file.

With Partials, a test can now cause some functions in the source module under test to be mocked while other source functions are executed against assertions (see #936). Partials also allow testing of `static` and `inline` functions with no modification of your source code under test.

💲 The Partials feature made possible thanks to a generous corporate sponsor via a [Ceedling Assist](https://www.thingamabyte.com/ceedling) engagement.

### Two more example projects plus expanded `temp_sensor` project

`wondrous_forest` and `cipher_quest` join the existing `temp_sensor` project. All example projects now have [comprehensive documentation](https://throwtheswitch.github.io/Ceedling/1.1.0/getting-started/example-projects/).

1. The `wondrous_forest` test-only project demonstrates using [Partials](https://throwtheswitch.github.io/Ceedling/1.1.0/testing-guide/partials/) in sample code reasonably representative of real-world use.
1. The `cipher_quest` project is both a release and test build project that demonstrates conditional compilation builds (`ifdef`) and using [Mixins](https://throwtheswitch.github.io/Ceedling/1.1.0/configuration/mixins) to control builds.

The existing `temp_sensor` project has been expanded to more fully illustrate testing for embbeded development. It now shows a pure C approach to creating hardware access standins that allow testing of peripheral manipulation. The approach demonstrated divorces unit tests from any actual hardware dependence while preserving production C code as is.

### Documentation site

Ceedling is now complemented by a full, searchable [documentation site](https://throwtheswitch.github.io/Ceedling/).

A local verion of this site that is navigable with your web browser from your filesystem is included within Ceedling and exportable through CLI commands.

### Command line interface additions

- `ceedling help` output now provides links for further support and [Github sponsorship](https://github.com/sponsors/ThrowTheSwitch).

#### New application commands

- `ceedling check` validates your configuration and produces logs from processing it without executing a build.
- `ceedling docs` exports the new HTML-based documentation site to your local filesystem.

#### Mixins inline YAML

The optional `--mixin` flag for all application commands supporting it now additionally [supports inline YAML](https://throwtheswitch.github.io/Ceedling/1.1.0/configuration/mixins/#-mixin-command-line-flags). Example: `--mixin "=defines: {release: ['MY_SYMBOL']}"`

### Cppcheck static analysis plugin

[Alejandro Rosso](https://github.com/deltalejo)’s excellent [Cppcheck plugin](https://throwtheswitch.github.io/Ceedling/1.1.0/plugins/cppcheck/) has been added to the stock plugin collection (with Alejandro’s permission). We’re excited to make it easier for everyone to use this great addition!

### Valgrind memory check plugin

[James Raphael Tiovalen](https://github.com/jamestiotio)’s helpful [Valgrind plugin](https://throwtheswitch.github.io/Ceedling/1.1.0/plugins/valgrind/) has been updated to work with the latest Ceedling and added to the stock plugin collection. Thank you, James for the great contribution!

### GCov plugin code coverage enhancements

#### Support for Modified Condition / Decision Coverage
Ceedling’s [GCov plugin](https://throwtheswitch.github.io/Ceedling/1.1.0/plugins/gcov/) for coverage reporting now supports the [Modified Condition / Decision Coverage](https://ldra.com/capabilities/mc-dc/) abilities of GCC 14+ and optionally GCovr 8+.

_NOTE:_ The `ReportGenerator` tool does not support extracting MC/DC even if those metrics are available in the coverage data dumps that it processes. The GCov plugin can provide MC/DC metrics through its simplistic console reports and through the rich reports generated by GCovr.

#### Code coverage for all source files, not just those under test

This feature addition resolves a longstanding feature request for coverage reporting (#329 and others).

The Gcov plugin now includes an option (defaults to enabled) that causes all source files in the project that have not been exercised by unit tests to also be compiled with coverage. Doing so causes all source files to appear in the final coverage report; those untouched by unit tests are represented with 0% coverage.

See the [GCov plugin documentation](https://throwtheswitch.github.io/Ceedling/1.1.0/plugins/gcov/setup#coverage-for-untested-sources) for more details on the new `:untested_sources` option.

### Preprocessing for tests

#### System includes
Preprocessing support now properly distinguishes and handles system includes (`#include <system.h>`) and user includes (`#include "user.h"`).

#### Fallback preprocessing
When your toolchain’s preprocessor lacks certain features, Ceedling still attempts to extract information and code from C files through fallback text processing. This fallback processing has been improved in a handful of ways, most notably implementing simple conditional compilation (`#ifdef`) processing.

### Project configuration

#### `:project` ↳ `:name`
Optional project name that, if present, adds a new first line to build logging output with the project name.

#### `:test_build` ↳ `:preprocess_force_fallback`
When test preprocessing is enabled, Ceedling discovers whether your toolchain supports certain preprocessing options. If it does not, Ceedling uses simpler fallback options to extract text from C source and header files. This option overrides that discovery and forces the fallback options to be used. This is primarily used for Ceedling’s self-tests, but it could be handy if the automatic feature probe fails with a false positive.

## 💪 Fixed

- #1011 Performance Improvements.
- #1014 Line Continuations not working in test name.
- #1024 Fixed bug in options-handling for warnings log report.
- Now properly reports timing for single-batch builds (i.e. non-parallel builds).
- Mixins
   - #1128 Command line mixin precedence.
   - Revisions to [Mixin documentation](https://throwtheswitch.github.io/Ceedling/latest/configuration/mixins) to correct merge order explanations and clarify Mixins generally.
- Multiple fixes and improvements to `#include`s handling and preprocessing plus these issues & PRs:
   - PR #1126 Fix for race condition in cache handling of `#include` listings in YAML files.
   - #1015 Probing toolchain for presence of preprocessor directives-only ability.
   - #1085 Fix relative `#include` path handling that broke test build convention.
   - #358 Mocks with relative path in `#include` directive.
   - PR #1056 Fix for extracting `#include` directive filenames that contain dashes.
   - #1127 Fixes to path handling in `#include` directives.
   - #1158 Fixes for `#include` filtering in test runner generation.
- Type handling in example `temp_sensor` project compatible with C23 (and previous C standards).
- #1120 Fixed (by removal) an overly “helpful” holdover from Ceedling’s earliest days causing certain temporary and backup files to be cleaned that were needed by the user’s IDE and text editing tooling.
- #1162 Fixes to Partials handling for file encoding / multi-byte characters (e.g. ©) in comment blocks.
- #1160 Proper handling of locales and file encoding.
- #1135 Fixed test fixture results handling to properly process Unity’s colored output when enabled.
- #1114 Fixed `:default_tasks` handling.
- GCov plugin
   - `:gcov` section of `:flags` is able to use filename matchers again (like `:test` section).
   - #1115 Fixed Gcov plugin for Gcovr configuration file handling.
   - #1161 Fixed “Found no coverage results” when system headers are processed by coverage.
   - #1170 GCovr summary not passed through to NORMAL logging at end of a GCov plugin build.
   - #1081 Fixes for Gcovr summary cooperating with coverage threshold failures.
   - Prevention of coverage corruption during `ReportGenerator` reporting runs.
- #1144 Fixed flags for release build linking.
- #1169 Fixed linking with :libraries ↳ :release.
- #1112 Fixed test failures incorrectly returning exit code 0 when the stdout pretty printer plugin is disabled. (@corytodd)

## ⚠️ Changed

- PR #1003 improvements for Mixin merges — clearer logging and edge case handling.
- Added warning logging if a Mixin contains mixins (nesting is not supported).
- Mixins now merge list content according to mixin priority. In all cases but one, a higher priority mixin inserts its list content before the content of the existing list to which it is merging. In the case of `:tools` `:arguments` lists, insertion occurs at the end of the arguments list to enable the typical CLI convention of rightmost argument having the highest priority.
- Significant refactoring and improvements to logging and parallel processing.
- Streamlined preprocessing, eliminating redundant steps and reducing memory usage.
- The GCov plugin now compiles all files with coverage (and filters out unneeded framework results) in order to meet the stricter coverage handling that began with GCC 14. This change is backwards and forwards compatible with virtually all versions of GCC and the GCov plugin’s supporting utilities.
- Resolved ambiguity in updated `ceedling new` handling from 0.31.1 to 1.0.0.
- Fixes for typos and grammar in documentation and logging.

## 👋 Removed

- _CeedlingPacket.md_ user manual (superseded by [new documentation site](https://throwtheswitch.github.io/Ceedling/) and local bundle).
- _PluginDevelopmentGuide.md_ (superseded by [new documentation site](https://throwtheswitch.github.io/Ceedling/) and local bundle).

# [1.0.1] — 2025-01-30

## 💪 Fixed

- `#978` -- Ceedling attempts to link source files that are commented out and/or removed by preprocessor directives
- `#979` -- FFF plugin generates "warning: already initialized constant CMock" on some platforms
- `#980` -- FFF original plugin should not be part of release build (le sigh)
- `#981` -- Ceedling could not find header file to mock when using preprocessor
- `#982` -- Ceedling did not inject required header file into mock when using preprocessor
- `#985` -- Macros not being properly hidden from CMock’s parser when using preprocessor
- `#988` -- Parsing of `TEST_SOURCE_FILE` did not support special characters (like `.`) in filenames
- `#888` & `#977` -- Unicode characters produce crashes in various places
- `#996` -- Improved handling and documentation of module generator path options
- `#998` -- FFF plugin missing required stringio
- `#1005` -- Additional handling of preprocessing extraction improvements
- Restored `:use_mocks` default to `true` in Ceedling defaults to match documentation and other mocking defaults in template projects.
- Resolved a preprocessing issue that could cause the content of a file having a similar filename to that of the file `#include`ing it to become mixed with that file.
- additional documentation improvements

# [1.0.0] — 2025-01-01

## 🌟 Added

### Parallel execution of build steps

As was explained in the _[Highlights](#-Highlights)_, Ceedling can now run its internal tasks in parallel and take full advantage of your build system’s resources. Even lacking various optimizations (see _[Known Issues](#-Known-Issues)_) builds are now often quite speedy.

Enabling this speedup requires either or both of two simple configuration settings. See Ceedling’s [documentation](CeedlingPacket.md) for `:project` ↳ `:compile_threads` and `:project` ↳ `:test_threads`.

### A proper command line

Ceedling now offers a full command line interface with rich help, useful order-independent option flags, and more.

The existing `new`, `upgrade`, `example`, and `exampples` commands remain but have been improved. For those commands that support it, you may now specify the project file to load (see new, related mixins feature discussed elsewhere), log file to write to, exit code handling behavior, and more from the command line.

Try `ceedling help` and then `ceedling help <command>` to get started.

See the _[Release Notes](ReleaseNotes.md)_ and _[CeedlingPacket](CeedlingPacket.md)_ for more on the new and improved command line.

### `TEST_INCLUDE_PATH(...)` & `TEST_SOURCE_FILE(...)`

Issue [#743](https://github.com/ThrowTheSwitch/Ceedling/issues/743)

Using what we are calling test build directive macros, you can now provide Ceedling certain configuration details from inside a test file.

See the [documentation](CeedlingPacket.md) discussion on include paths, Ceedling conventions, and these macros to understand all the details.

_Notes:_

* Ceedling can preserves these test build directive macros through preprocessing of test files. However, wrapping `TEST_INCLUDE_PATH()` in conditional compilation C preprocessing statements (e.g. `#ifdef`) can produce unexpected resutls (see documentation for more).
* Both `TEST_INCLUDE_PATH()` & `TEST_SOURCE_FILE()` can be disabled with standard C comments.
* However, preprocessing of mockable header files can now be enabled separately (see `:project` ↳ `:use_test_preprocessor`).

#### `TEST_INCLUDE_PATH(...)` 

In short, `TEST_INCLUDE_PATH()` allows you to add a header file search path to the build of the test executable in which it is found. This can mean much shorter compilation command lines and good flexibility for complicated projects. Unlike , `TEST_SOURCE_FILE()` this should _**not**_ be wrapped in conditional compilation preprocessing statements (see documentation for more).

#### `TEST_SOURCE_FILE(...)`

In short, `TEST_SOURCE_FILE()` allows you to be explicit as to which source C files should be compiled and linked into a test executable. Sometimes Ceedling’s convention for matching source files with test files by way of `#include`d header files does not meet the need. This solves the problems of those scenarios. Unlike  `TEST_INCLUDE_PATH()` , this test build directive _can_ be wrapped in in conditional compilation preprocessing statements (see documentation for more).

### Mixins for modifying your configuration

Thorough documentation on Mixins can be found in _[CeedlingPacket](CeedlingPacket.md)_.

### Additional options for loading a base configuration from a project file

Once upon a time, you could load a project configuration in just two simple ways — _project.yml_ in your working directory and an environment variable pointing to a different file. Those days are over.

You may now:

* Load your project configuration from a filepath provided at the command line.
* Load your project configuration from an environment variable hoding a filepath.
* Load your project configuration from the default _project.yml_ in your working directory.
* Modify your configuration with Mixins loaded from your project file, environment variables, and/or from the command line.

All the options for loading and modifying a project configuration are thoroughly documented in _[CeedlingPacket](CeedlingPacket.md))_.

### Additional and improved configuration validation

Ceedling’s validation of your configuration has been significantly expanded to cover more sections and with more helpful error messages.

### Broader crash detection in test suites and new backtrace abilities

Previously Ceedling had a limited ability to detect and report segmentation faults and primarily only on Unix-like platforms. This has been expanded and improved to crash detection more broadly. Invalid memory accesses, stack overflows, heap errors, and branching problems can all lead to crashed test executables. Ceedling is now able to detect these across platforms and report on them appropriately.

Ceedling defaults to executing this new behavior. Optionally, it can be disabled or its reporting enhanced further by enabling the use of `gdb`.

See _[CeedlingPacket](CeedlingPacket.md))_ for the new `:project` ↳ `:use_backtrace` feature to control how much detail is extracted from a crashed test executable to help you find the cause.

### More better `:flags` handling

Issue [#43](https://github.com/ThrowTheSwitch/Ceedling/issues/43)

Each test executable is now built as a mini project. Using improved `:flags` handling and an updated section format within Ceedling’s project configuration, you have much better options for specifying flags presented to the various tools within your build, particulary within test builds.

### More better `:defines` handling

Each test executable is now built as a mini project. Using improved `:defines` handling and an updated section format within Ceedling’s project configuration, you have much better options for specifying symbols used in your builds' compilation steps, particulary within test builds.

One powerful new feature is the ability to test the same source file built differently for different tests. Imagine a source file has three different conditional compilation sections. You can now write unit tests for each of those sections without complicated gymnastics to cause your test suite to build and run properly.

### Inline Ruby string expansion for `:flags` and `:defines` configuration entries

Inline Ruby string expansion has been, well, expanded for use in `:flags` and `:defines` entries to complement existing such functionality in `:environment`, `:paths`, `:tools`, etc.

The previously distributed documentation for inline Ruby string expansion has been collected into a single subsection within the project file documentation and improved.

### `:unity` ↳ `:use_param_tests`

Previous versions of Ceedling had limited support for enabling builds of Unity’s parameterized test cases. Multiple configuration settings were needed to enable test builds with these test case features. Now, setting this single configuration value in the `:unity` section of your Ceedling project configuration automatically assembles the correct compilation and test runner generation options.

### `report_tests_log_factory` plugin

This new plugin consolidates a handful of previously discrete report gernation plugins into a single plugin that also enables low-code, custom, end-user created reports.

The abilities of these previously independent plugins are now supersededed by configuration options for the single, new `report_tests_log_factory` plugin:

1. `junit_tests_report`
1. `json_tests_report`
1. `xml_tests_report`

This new plugin also includes the option to generate an HTML report (see next section).

### HTML tests report

A community member submitted an [HTML report generation plugin](https://github.com/ThrowTheSwitch/Ceedling/pull/756/) that was not officially released before 1.0. It has been absorbed into the new `report_tests_log_factory` plugin (see previous section).

### Improved Segfault Handling

Segmentation faults are now reported as failures with as much details as possible instead of as build errors. If `gdb` is available, Ceedling can now even automatically highlight the source of the segfault (see section above on crash detection).

### Support for assembly code in test builds with `:test_build` ↳ `:use_assembly`

Previous versions of Ceedling included support for including assembly code in release builds. Now Ceedling can include assembly code in test builds as well.

The default assembler is the GNU tool `as`. Like all other tools it may be overridden in the `:tools` section.

To enable this feature, use the following in your project configuration:

```yaml
:test_build:
  :use_assembly: TRUE
```

In order to inject assembly code files into the build of a test executable after enabling test build assembly code, two conditions must be true:

1. The assembly files must be visible to Ceedling by way of `:paths` and `:extension` settings for assembly files — just like C code files.
1. Ceedling must be told into which test executable build to insert a given assembly file. The easiest way to do so is with the new `TEST_SOURCE_FILE()` build directive macro — described elsewhere in this Changelog and documented in _[CeedlingPacket](CeedlingPacket.md)_.

When either `:test_build` ↳ `:use_assembly` or `:release_build` ↳ `:use_assembly` are enabled, Ceedling’s command line `files:` tasks will list assembly files among the files it discovers from your project configuration. That is, you can confirm your settings for assembly code with those tasks. See _[CeedlingPacket](CeedlingPacket.md)_’s documentation for the command line.

### Pretty logging output

Ceedling logging now optionally includes emoji and nice Unicode characters. Ceedling will attempt to determine if your platform supports it. You can use the environment variable `CEEDLING_DECORATORS` to force the feature on or off. See the documentation for logging decorators in _[CeedlingPacket](CeedlingPacket.md)_.

### Vendored license files

The application commands `ceedling new` and `ceedling upgrade` at the command line provide project creation and management functions. Optionally, these commands can vendor tools and libraries locally alongside your project. These vendoring options now include license files along with the source of the vendored tools and libraries.

### Additional details in Ceedling version output

`ceedling version` output now includes the Git Commit short SHA in Ceedling’s build identifier and Ceedling’s path of origin.

```
🌱 Welcome to Ceedling!

  Ceedling => #.#.#-<Short SHA>
  ----------------------
  <Ceedling install path>

  Build Frameworks
  ----------------------
       CMock => #.#.#
       Unity => #.#.#
  CException => #.#.#
```

If the short SHA information is unavailable such as in local development, the SHA is omitted. The source for this string is generated and captured in the Gem at the time of Ceedling’s automated build in CI.

### Tool definition modification shortcuts expanded for `:executable`

A shortcut for adding arguments to an existing tool defition already existed. The handling for this shortcut has been expanded to allow `:executable` to be redefined.

```yaml
:tools_test_compiler:
  :executable: foo # Shell out for `foo` instead of `gcc`
  :arguments:      # Existing functionality
    - --flag1      # Add the following at the end of existing list of command line arguments
    - --flag2
```

### Gcov plugin: Support for `gcovr`’s `--merge-mode-functions` for v6.0+

Starting with `gcovr` v6.0 (now at v7.2), report generation can encounters a fatal error if multiple coverage results exist for the same function. This is a very possible scenario with Ceedling 1.0.0 now being able to build and run the same same test executable multiple ways.

Support for this option, enacted based on `gcovr`’s reported version, has been added to the Gcov plugin with a reasonable default setting.

## 💪 Fixed

### `:paths` and `:files` handling bug fixes and clarification

Most project configurations are relatively simple, and Ceedling’s features for collecting paths worked fine enough. However, bugs and ambiguities lurked. Further, insufficient validation left users resorting to old fashioned trial-and-error troubleshooting.

Much glorious filepath and pathfile handling now abounds:

* The purpose and use of `:paths` and `:files` has been clarified in both code and documentation. `:paths` are directory-oriented while `:files` are filepath-oriented.
* [Documentation](CeedlingPacket.md) is now accurate and complete.
* Path handling edge cases have been properly resolved (`./foo/bar` is the same as `foo/bar` but was not always processed as such).
* Matching globs were advertised in the documentation (erroneously, incidentally) but lacked full programmatic support.
* Ceedling now tells you if your matching patterns don't work. Unfortunately, all Ceedling can determine is if a particular pattern yielded 0 results.

### Ceedling’s `:use_test_preprocessor` and CMock’s `:treat_inlines` now work together properly

This fix addresses the problem detailed in PR [#728](https://github.com/ThrowTheSwitch/Ceedling/pull/728) and related issues.

CMock can optionally mock inline functions. This requires ingesting, modifying, and rewriting a source hearder file along with then mocking it. Sophisticated header files with complex macros can require that the source header file be preprocessed before CMock then processes it a second time. In previous versions of Ceedling the preprocessing steps and handoff to CMock were not working as intended. This has been fixed.

### Bug fix for test runner generation

Issue [#621](https://github.com/ThrowTheSwitch/Ceedling/issues/621)

For certain advanced testing scenarios test runners generated by Ceedling + Unity must have the same `#include` list as that of the test file itself from which a runner is gnerated. Previous versions of Ceedling did not provide the proper list of `#include` directives to runner generation. This has been fixed.

### Bug fixes for command line build tasks `files:header` and `files:support`

Longstanding bugs produced duplicate and sometimes incorrect lists of header files. Similarly, support file lists were not properly expanded from globs. Both of these problems have been fixed. The `files:header` command line task has replaced the `files:include` task.

### Dashed filename handling bug fix

Issue [#780](https://github.com/ThrowTheSwitch/Ceedling/issues/780)

In certain combinations of Ceedling features, a dash in a C filename could cause Ceedling to exit with an exception. This has been fixed.

### Source filename extension handling bug fix

Issue [#110](https://github.com/ThrowTheSwitch/Ceedling/issues/110)

Ceedling has long had the ability to configure a source filename extension other than `.c` (`:extension` ↳ `:source`). However, in most circumstances this ability would lead to broken builds. Regardless of user-provided source files and filename extenion settings, Ceedling’s supporting frameworks — Unity, CMock, and CException — all have `.c` file components. Ceedling also generates mocks and test runners with `.c` filename extensions regardless of any filename extension setting. Changing the source filename extension would cause Ceedling to miss its own core source files. This has been fixed.

### Bug fixes for `gcov` plugin

The most commonly reported bugs have been fixed:

* `nil` references
* Exit code issues with recent releases of `gcov`
* Empty coverage results and related build failures

### Bug fixes for `beep` plugin

A handful of small bugs in using shell `echo` with the ASCII bell character have been fixed.

### Which Ceedling handling includes new environment variable `WHICH_CEEDLING`

A previously semi-documented feature allowed you to point to a version of Ceedling on disk to run from within your project file, `:project` ↳ `:which_ceedling`.

This feature is primarily of use to Ceedling developers but can be useful in other specialized scenarios. See the documentation in _[CeedlingPacket](CeedlingPacket.md))_ for full deatils as this is an advanced feature.

The existing feature has been improved with logging and validation as well as proper documentation. An environment variable `WHICH_CEEDLING` is now also supported. If set, this variable supersedes any other settings. In the case of `ceedling new` and `ceedling upgrade`, it is the only way to change which Ceedling is in use as a project file either does not exist for the former or is not loaded for the latter.

### Ceedling now handles C files with dots in their filenames

Previous versions of Ceedling made assumptions about file naming conventions — specifically that the only place a period occurred was in a filename extension. In reality, C supports the same basic filenames as any file system does. Filenames can include periods throughout their name.

As an example, some legacy code includes a versioning scheme in the name itself — _foo.12.h_. Such names would previously break builds. This has been fixed.

## ⚠️ Changed

### Preprocessing improvements

Issues [#806](https://github.com/ThrowTheSwitch/Ceedling/issues/806) + [#796](https://github.com/ThrowTheSwitch/Ceedling/issues/796)

Preprocessing refers to expanding macros and other related code text manipulations often needed in sophisticated projects before key test suite generation steps. Without (optional) preprocessing in complicated code bases, generating test runners from test files and generating mocks from header files lead to all manner of build shenanigans.

The preprocessing needed by Ceedling for sophisticated projects has always been a difficult feature to implement. The most significant reason is simply that there is no readily available cross-platform C code preprocessing tool that provides Ceedling everything it needs to accomplish this task. Even gcc’s `cpp` preprocessor tool comes up short. Over time Ceedling’s attempt at preprocessing grew more brittle and complicated as community contribturs attempted to fix it or cause it to work properly with other new features.

This release of Ceedling stripped the feature back to basics and largely rewrote it. Complicated regular expressions and Ruby-generated temporary files have been eliminated. Instead, Ceedling now blends two reports from gcc’s `cpp` tool and complements this with additional context. In addition, preprocessing now occurs at the right moments in the build pipeline.

While this new approach is not 100% foolproof, it is far more robust and far simpler than previous attempts. Other new Ceedling features should be able to address shortcomings in edge cases.

### Project file environment variable name change `CEEDLING_MAIN_PROJECT_FILE` ➡️ `CEEDLING_PROJECT_FILE`

Options and support for loading a project configuration have expanded significantly, mostly notably with the addition of Mixins.

The environment variable option for pointing Ceedling to a project file other than _project.yml_ in your working directory has been renamed `CEEDLING_MAIN_PROJECT_FILE` ➡️ `CEEDLING_PROJECT_FILE`.

Documentation on Mixins and the new options for loading a project configuration are thoroughly documented in _[CeedlingPacket](CeedlingPacket.md))_.

### Configuration defaults and configuration set up order

Ceedling’s previous handling of defaults and configuration processing order certainly worked, but it was not as proper as it could be. To oversimplify, default values were applied in an ordering that caused complications for advanced plugins and advanced users. This has been rectified. Default settings are now processed after all user configurations and plugins.

### `:project` ↳ `:use_test_preprocessor` has new configuration options

`:project` ↳ `:use_test_preprocessor` is no longer a binary setting (true/false). What is preprocessed can be chosen with the options `:none`, `:tests`, `:mocks`, `:all`. 

* `:none` maps to the previous false option (preprocessing disabled).
* `:all` maps to the previous true option running preprpocessing for all mockable header files and test C files.
* `:mocks` enables only preprocessing of header files that are to be mocked.
* `:tests` enables only preprocessing of your test files.

### Plugin system improvements

1. The plugin subsystem has incorporated logging to trace plugin activities at high verbosity levels.
1. Additional events have been added for test preprocessing steps (the popular and useful [`command_hooks` plugin](plugins/command_hooks/README.md) has been updated accordingly).
1. Built-in plugins have been updated for thread-safety as Ceedling is now able to execute builds with multiple threads.

### Logging improvements

Logging messages are more useful. A variety of logging messages have been added throughout Ceedling builds. Message labels (e.g. `ERROR:`) are now applied automatically). Exception handling is now centralized and significantly cleans up exception messages (backtraces are available with debug verbosity).

### Exit code options for test suite failures

Be default Ceedling terminates with an exit code of `1` when a build succeeds but unit tests fail.

A previously undocumented project configuration option `:graceful_fail` could force a Ceedling exit code of `0` upon test failures.

This configuration option has moved but is now [documented](CeedlingPacket.md). It is also available as a new command line argument (`--graceful-fail`).

```yaml
:test_build:
  :graceful_fail: TRUE
```

### Improved Segfault Handling in Test Suites

Segmentation faults are now reported as failures instead of an error with as much detail as possible. See the project configuration file documentation discussing the `:project` ↳ `:use_backtrace` option for more!

### Altered local documentation file directory structure

The application commands `ceedling new` and `ceedling upgrade` at the command line provide options for local copies of documentation when creating or upgrading a project. Previous versions of Ceedling used a flat file structure for the _docs/_ directory. Ceedling now uses subdirectories to organize plugin and tool documentation within the _docs/_ directory for clearer organization and preserving original filenames.

### JUnit, XML & JSON test report plugins consolidation

The three previously discrete plugins listed below have been consolidated into a single new plugin, `report_tests_log_factory`:

1. `junit_tests_report`
1. `json_tests_report`
1. `xml_tests_report`

`report_tests_log_factory` is able to generate all 3 reports of the plugins it replaces, a new HTML report, and custom report formats with a small amount of user-written Ruby code (i.e. not an entire Ceedling plugun). See its [documentation](../plugins/report_tests_log_factory) for more.

The report format of the previously independent `xml_tests_report` plugin has been renamed from _XML_ in all instances to _CppUnit_ as this is the specific test reporting format the former plugin and new `report_tests_log_factory` plugin outputs.

In some circumstances, JUnit report generation would yield an exception in its routines for reorganizing test results (Issues [#829](https://github.com/ThrowTheSwitch/Ceedling/issues/829) & [#833](https://github.com/ThrowTheSwitch/Ceedling/issues/833)). The true source of the nil test results entries has likely been fixed but protections have also been added in JUnit report generation as well.

### Improvements and changes for Gcov plugin

1. Documentation has been significantly updated including a _Troubleshooting_ for common issues.
1. Compilation with coverage now only occurs for the source files under test and no longer for all C files (i.e. coverage for unity.c, mocks, and test files that is meaningless noise has been eliminated).
1. Coverage summaries printed to the console after `gcov:` test task runs now only concern the source files exercised instead of all source files. A final coverage tally has been restored.
1. Coverage summaries can now be disabled.
1. Coverage reports are now automatically generated after `gcov:` test tasks are executed. This behvaior can be disabled with a new configuration option. When enabled, a separate task is made available to trigger report generation.
1. To maintain consistency, repports generated by `gcovr` and `reportgenerator` are written to subdirectories named for the respective tools benath the `gcov/` artifacts path.

See the [gcov plugin’s documentation](plugins/gcov/README.md).

### Improvements for `compile_commands_json_db` plugin

1. The plugin creates a compilation database that distinguishes the same code file compiled multiple times with different configurations as part of the new test suite build structure. It has been updated to work with other Ceedling changes.
1. Documentation has been greatly revised.

### Improvements for Beep plugin

1. Additional sound tools — `:tput`, `:beep`, and `:say` — have been added for more platform sound output options and fun.
1. Documentation has been greatly revised.
1. The plugin more properly uses looging and system shell calls.

## Improvements for Command Hooks plugin

In previous versions of Ceedling, the Command Hooks plugin associated tools and hooks by a naming convention within the top-level `:tools` section of your project configuration. This required some semi-ugly tool names and could lead to a rather unwieldy `:tools` list. Further, this convention also limited a hook to an association with only a single tool.

Hooks are now enabled within a top-level `:command_hooks` section in your project configuration. Each hook key in this configuration block can now support one or more tools organized beneath it. As such, each hook can execute one or more tools.

### Tool definition inline Ruby string expansion now happens at each execution

Reaching back to the earliest days of Ceedling, tool definitions supported two slightly different string replacement options that executed at different points in a build’s lifetime. Yeah. It was maybe not great. This has been simplfied.

Only support for `#{...}` Ruby string expansion in tool definitions remains. Any such expansions are now evaluated each time a tool is executed during a build.

## 👋 Removed

### `verbosity` and `log` command line tasks have been replaced with command line switches

These command line features were implemented using Rake. That is, they were Rake tasks, not command line switches, and they were subject to the peculiarities of Rake tasks. Specifically, order mattered — these tasks had to precede build tasks they were to affect — and `verbosity` required a non-standard parameter convention for numeric values.

These command line tasks no longer exist. They are now proper command line flags. These are most useful (and, in the case of logging, only availble) with Ceedling’s new `build` command line argument. The `build` command takes a list of build & plugin tasks to run. It is now complmented by `--verbosity`, `--log`, and `--logfile` flags. See the detailed help at `ceedling help build` for these.

The `build` keyword is optional. That is, omitting it is allowed and operates largely equivalent to the historical Ceedling command line.

The previous command line of `ceedling verbosity[4] test:all release` or `ceedling verbosity:obnoxious test:all release` can now be any of the following:

* `ceedling test:all release --verbosity=obnoxious`
* `ceedling test:all release -v 4`
* `ceedling --verbosity=obnoxious test:all release`
* `ceedling -v 4 test:all release`

Note: In the above list Ceedling is actually executing as though `ceedling build <args>` were entered at the command line. It is entirely acceptable to use the full form. The above list is provided as its form is the simplest to enter and consistent with the command line conventions of previous Ceedling versions.

### `options:` tasks have been removed

Options files were a simple but limited way to merge configuration with your base configuration from the command line. This feature has been superseded by Ceedling Mixins.

### `:import` project configuration section is no longer supported

The `:import` project configuration section was a simple but limited way to merge configuration with your base configuration. This feature has been superseded by all new and more powerful Ceedling Mixins.

### Test suite smart rebuilds have been temporarily removed

All “smart” test suite rebuild features built around Rake no longer exist. That is, incremental test suite builds for only changed files are no longer possible. Any test build is a full rebuild of its components (the speed increase due to parallel build tasks more than makes up for this).

These project configuration options related to smart builds are no longer recognized and likely will not return in this form:
  - `:use_deep_dependencies`
  - `:generate_deep_dependencies`
  - `:auto_link_deep_dependencies`

In future revisions of Ceedling, smart rebuilds will be brought back (without relying on Rake) and without a list of possibly conflicting configuation options to control related features.

Note: Release builds do retain a fair amount of smart rebuild capabilities. Release builds continue to rely on Rake (for now).

### Temporarily removed preprocessor support for Unity’s parameterized test case macros `TEST_CASE()` and `TEST_RANGE()`

Unity’s `TEST_CASE()` and `TEST_RANGE()` continue to work but only when `:project` ↳ `:use_test_preprocessor` is not enabled for test files. The previous project configuration option `:use_preprocessor_directives` that preserved these and other directive macros when preprocessing is enabled is no longer recognized.

`TEST_CASE()` and `TEST_RANGE()` are macros that disappear when the GNU preprocessor digests a test file. After preprocessing, these macros no longer exist in the test file that is compiled. They and some other macros are largely used as markers for advanced abilities discovered by parsing a test file rather than compiling it.

In future revisions of Ceedling, support for `TEST_CASE()` and `TEST_RANGE()` when test file preprocessing is enabled will be brought back (very likely without a dedicated configuration option — hopefully, we’ll get it to just work).

Note: `:project` ↳ `:use_test_preprocessor` is no longer a binary setting (`true`/`false`). Mockable header file preprocessing can now be enabled with a `:mocks` setting while test files are left untouched by preprocessing. This should support the majority of advanced use cases for preprocessing.

Note: `:project` ↳ `:use_deep_preprocessor` is an additional setting which can be used to specify if the entire header include chain should be listed in generated mock and test files. Like the option above, it has options of `:none`, `:mocks`, `:tests` and `:all`. It is very likely `:none` or `:mocks` are the right choice for you.

### Removed background task execution

Background task execution for tool configurations (`:background_exec`) has been deprecated. This option was one of Ceedling’s earliest features attempting to speed up builds within the constraints of relying on Rake. This feature has rarely, if ever, been used in practice, and other, better options exist to manage any scenario that might motivate a background task.

### Removed `colour_report` plugin

Colored build output and test results in your terminal is glorious. Long ago the `colour_report` plugin provided this. It was a simple plugin that hooked into Ceedling in a somewhat messy way. Its approach to coloring output was also fairly brittle. It long ago stopped coloring build output as intended. It has been removed.

Ceedling’s logging will eventually be updated to rely on a proper logging library. This will provide a number of important features along with greater speed and stability for the tool as a whole. This will also be the opportunity to add robust terminal text coloring support.

### Bullseye code coverage plugin temporarily disabled

The Gcov plugin has been updated and improved, but its proprietary counterpart, the [Bullseye](https://www.bullseye.com) plugin, is not presently functional. The needed fixes and updates require a software license that we do not (yet) have.

### Gcov plugin’s support for deprecated features removed

The configuration format for the `gcovr` utility changed when support for the `reportgenerator` utility was added. A format that accomodated a more uniform and common layout was adopted. However, support for the older, deprecated `gcovr`-only configuration was maintained. This support for the deprecated `gcovr` configuration format has been removed.

Please consult the [gcov plugin’s documentation](plugins/gcov/README.md) to update any old-style `gcovr` configurations.

### Gcov plugin’s `:abort_on_uncovered` option temporarily removed

Like Ceedling’s preprocessing features, the Gcov plugin had grown in features and complexity over time. The plugin had become difficult to maintain and some of its features had become user unfriendly at best and misleading at worst.

The Gcov plugin’s `:abort_on_uncovered` option plus the related `:uncovered_ignore_list` option were not preserved in this release. They will be brought back after some noodling on how to make these features user friendly again.

### Undocumented environment variable `CEEDLING_USER_PROJECT_FILE` support removed

A previously undocumented feature for merging a second configuration via environment variable `CEEDLING_USER_PROJECT_FILE` has been removed. This feature has been superseded by the new Mixins functionality.

### Tool definition inline Ruby _evaluation_ replacement removed (inline Ruby string _expansion_ remains)

Reaching back to the earliest days of Ceedling, tool definitions supported two slightly different string replacement options that executed at different points in a build’s lifetime. Yeah. It was maybe not great.

Support for `{...}` Ruby evaluation in tool definitions has been removed. Support for `#{...}` Ruby string expansion in tool definitions remains.

### Tool definition defaults use of environment variables

Ceedling’s internal default tool definitions no longer incorporate (undocumented) environment variable lookups.

When Ceedling was very young and tool definitions were relatively simple, Ceedling’s defaults were configured to incorporate commonly used environment variables (e.g. `CC_FLAGS`). This made sense at the time. As Ceedling’s tool processing grew in sophistication, this convention no longer made sense for a variety of reasons. All such references have been removed.

If you want to incorporate environment variables into your tool definitions, you may still do so. See the documentation for inline Ruby string exapnsion and the various options for defining or modifying a tool definition. In short, you may incorporate `"#{ENV['<VAR>']}"` strings into your tooling.
  
### Undocumented `:project` ↳ `:debug` has been removed

This project setting existed from Ceedling’s earliest days and was a crude stand-in for command line debug verbosity handling.

It has been removed as it was rarely if ever utilized and needlessly complicated internal mechanisms for verbosity handling and project validation.

